Hey what's up everyone and welcome back to another video.
In this video we're going to see how we can incorporate some advanced styling using HTML,
CSS into our Shiny for Python apps.
So to get started you can go to this github link and all of the code and video resources
for each of the previous parts of these series can be found in the github repo.
But we're going to want to take the code from part 4, basically this app.py file and start
from there.
As a reminder, basically in the last video we had an app that looked like this, pretty
fully built out, but it just lacks some nice styling.
So in this video we're going to see how we can turn this app into a more polished app
that has a nice color scheme, etc. that looks like this.
Alright let's get started.
So I think a good starting point, I like to create a new branch to work off so I'll call
this video 5.
Let's look again at what we're ultimately trying to do.
Well we have a dashboard that looks like this and we're trying to convert it into one that
looks like this.
So I think that a good approach here is like draw out what you want your design to look
like and then ultimately like you modify your code to actually make that happen.
So that's kind of what we're following.
We have like this polished final product and we're trying to convert our existing code
to mimic that.
So I think it makes sense to start top down.
So let's go ahead and start with this title and logo.
How might we do that?
Again reminder within Visual Studio Code you can run this and see your app thus far.
We ultimately want to now make this video 505.
Looks good.
And I think a starting point, let's get some context on modifying HTML and CSS within our
app before we actually modify this title.
So within Shiny we have really useful abilities to actually directly modify the HTML and CSS
of our pages.
So if you're not super familiar with the HTML and CSS on any web page you ever browse on
you can right click and this is true in most browsers and click inspect.
And then what that basically opens up is all of this HTML source code.
So we can see that everything's kind of hidden within this body.
We can see the different elements of our screen.
So we can see that this H2 tag is our title and all of these different graphs are kind
of found in these divs.
And then additionally if we pull this open we also see the styles of all of this.
So I could hide some of these things and you would see the style change.
But this is our HTML and this is basically our CSS.
So we can actually modify that directly within our Shiny for Python code and start doing
some pretty cool things.
To do this, I think a good starting point is to add a UI.tags.style attribute to your
Python app.
You could do this in the same file or you could create a separate file to do this.
But basically anything that you put within this little element will modify the CSS in
your app.
So what might we want to do?
Well just for proof of concept, how about we change some of this visualization's background
colors.
I could inspect.
I could see that we're in this div.
I could see that we're in this sidebar.
I can start looking at IDs of things.
So we see we have this label class, control label.
If I wanted to, let's say, change up the style of this label within HTML and CSS, I could
do it via this.
So what was that called again?
The class was control label and the ID was city label.
So if I did class control label, this period right here specifies a class in CSS.
And then let's say I just wanted to do as a proof of concept, like background color
is blue, run this.
We see the control label now has a blue background for all of these different elements.
I could have also targeted just this city one by doing specifically
ID label right here, ID city label.
So if I didn't want this one to change, but I only wanted this element to change, I could
have done hashtag.
So this now, the hash sign, forget the pound sign, specifies an ID in CSS.
I could have done city label.
I run this.
We're going to see that this, oh, I spelled label wrong.
If I spell this correct, we'll see that this is still blue, but that other label down here
is no longer targeted by the class modification.
Maybe I wanted to change the font size to be like 50px.
So we'll see this label now get much bigger.
You could do all sorts of customizations.
Obviously, I will not leave it like this because maybe you have a different take, but I don't
think that this looks particularly good right now.
But it's cool to see that we can modify, start modifying the style of random elements.
What's even more useful than this though is that we can start giving elements on the screen.
So for example, like this layout sidebar, I could give this full sidebar, a class label,
something like custom sidebar, how about, and now I can modify this whole sidebar, the
attributes of it by, it's a class.
So it's period because whenever we're modifying classes, it's period, custom sidebar.
And we'll see that the font size within that sidebar, I don't think there's any real font
and the color should change.
For whatever reason, it's not changing.
But if you ever find that a color is not changing when you expect it to change, another little
helpful hint is you can do this hashtag or I keep saying hashtag, exclamation point important.
And that will force the changes to take place.
Again, making this blue does not help us much, but it's cool to know that we can do this.
And that's by adding this class underscore.
The reason we add the underscore is because in Python, class like this is a protected
name.
So basically to get around that, we have to do class underscore.
And if you wanted to modify the ID, likewise, you do ID underscore.
And that would allow you to customize these specific elements.
And you can do that with all UI elements within this.
Like I could have passed in a class to our sidebar, which is just this portion of the
sidebar, whereas the layout sidebar, I guess, defaults to this right section.
You could have added a class there, et cetera.
So all good to know.
We're going to remove this though for now, but it's good to see that this is possible.
All right.
So our goal right now with this first part is to modify this title.
So in the final polished product, we had a logo in there and a white text with a blue
background.
The logo is right next to the title.
So how can we make this happen?
I'm going to start by going to posit.shiny.
I want to go to the gallery.
So shiny.posit.co.py.
I'm actually going to go into, I think, components.
And I'm looking to see how we can put in an image.
I always find this components page super helpful.
And as we see in this output section, there's a nice image.
And lucky for us, this is already defaulting to the shiny logo.
So we see we have this code down here.
This is using a checkbox.
That's not really necessary for us.
So we can just copy this and make modifications as need be.
To grab this shiny image, I've left that in the GitHub repo.
You can go to the main page and you can go into assets and you'll find, if you're on
the master branch, you'll find shinylogo.png and click on that and save image as to download
it locally.
I recommend putting it within your project repo.
So if we look at our shiny Python projects, we have the sales folder.
I would recommend putting it in the sales folder.
That's where our app.py is.
And maybe we'll make a directory called images.
I'm going to do a copy, downloads, shiny logo to our images folder.
Now if we look in images, we see we have shinylogo.png.
Super.
All right.
And now to incorporate that, we want to copy that little code snippet we were just looking
at.
Copy that.
Go into our Visual Studio code.
I don't really care where I put it to start with.
So I'll just go ahead and put it at the top of my file.
Copy this code too.
I don't have that in here.
I'll put it in here.
And then we have ours not just in the directory.
We have it in images and then shinylogo.png.
We don't have this toggle.
So we can just go ahead and return the image and see what that does.
That looks pretty good to me.
So I'm happy with that.
But obviously it's not next to the title.
So we're going to have to play around with this a bit.
Kind of moving into the next recommendation here is you can really utilize the HTML and
CSS to your advantage here.
What we could do is we could actually define our own divs.
And by using divs strategically, it will make it a lot easier for us to strategically put
this logo right next to our title.
So I'm going to go ahead and do ui.div.
And we're going to want to give this div a name.
So I'll call this header container.
And it will be the exact same.
You can use ui.div or you could also do ui.tags.div.
I believe these are exactly the same.
In the documentation, you'll probably see ui.tags.div, but the little shorthand is ui.div.
And we can put the logo within this div.
It's going to be the exact same right now.
But we can start then getting even more creative.
Within this header container, we can put another div.
We'll call this.
And maybe the proper technique here would be giving these IDs.
I'm not an HTML, CSS expert.
So as long as you can customize this as you need, I am not too picky whether you use classes
or IDs.
But I'll call this logo container.
We'll put the logo in here.
And then finally, we can do with ui.div, call this title container, how about.
And then additionally, in addition to like ui.div, we could also do ui.h2 or tags.h2
and just pass in a title directly here.
So I'll do ui.h2 and then make this sales dashboard video five of five.
This is starting to look better.
I think the big issue we see here is now we have two copies of our title.
We open this up.
You'll see that this also says sales dashboard right here.
I kind of want to keep these page options set here, but instead of having this set as
title, I'll make this now window title.
Whatever this is won't affect this title down here, but it will affect what this tab says
right here.
So you can keep it as sales dashboard video five of five, or you could just keep it like
write it as final sales dashboard, whatever you think makes sense here, but around this
now we'll see this title disappear.
But we do see that we have some serious issues with how the logos lined up.
So maybe you're an HTML CSS expert.
I personally am definitely not.
So I love to tap into kind of the latest and greatest tools to help me out with this type
of thing.
So I might just go ahead and like copy this code snippet and then go to your LLM, your
favorite LLM of choice, like chat GPT, for example.
And I might write something like, can you make a white H2 title for me with a blue background
and have it aligned side by side with my logo or, and I'm going to change this to, can you
provide the CSS to make a white H2 title for me with a blue background and have it aligned
side by side with my logo image for reference.
Here is some shiny for Python code that I'm using to help with this.
Paste that in, whether you're using chat GPT 4.0 or 4.0 or 3.5.
Okay.
So it gave me some CSS to use.
I'm going to just copy this, see what happens out of the box and make adjustments as needed.
No longer need this custom sidebar that was just kind of to show things.
Run this.
Let's see what happens.
Getting a little bit better.
I don't know why this is so far above this.
Doing some inspection on this.
You can sometimes play around with things right in here.
I see that this logo container is taking up way more height than the title container.
So I think if we make this header container a set size and adjust the logo container and
the title container to fill it, that will probably help us out a lot.
So I'm going to go ahead and make the header container, let's say like 60 pixels.
So header container we'll say has a height of 60 PX.
See what happens now.
And then I'm going to go ahead and say that logo container has a height of 100%.
So because header container is above logo container, this should also make the logo
container have a height of 60 pixels.
And that's looking better.
Definitely looking better.
I think though this shiny logo is a bit too big.
I don't know why exactly that's happening.
Okay.
Actually, I see that the width is specified as 100 pixels here.
I think we should probably just get rid of that and let it be whatever it's going to
be.
I guess now it's going to be absolutely massive.
Trying to think here.
Can I do 100% and then say that this is important?
Or maybe we need to specify specifically the image tag so we can do this two-step sequence
to specify specifically the image tag.
I could very easily specify that I want the image to be like 40 pixels.
This is definitely going to work.
I don't know if it will work.
It looks a bit better.
What if I made this now 100%?
Okay.
That doesn't work properly.
I'm going to say that this is 40 pixels.
This is, you know, for me, this is kind of a bit of how I operate with HTML and CSS.
It's a little bit of playing around with things.
You could use ChatGPT more or Copilot more as needed.
Then what I will do here is I'm going to add a little bit of padding.
So if the logo container is 60 pixels and this is 40 pixels, to get it perfectly centered
here, if I add a padding, which will pad everything around that div, if I add a padding of 10
pixels, we should get a perfectly kind of centered logo.
Come on.
Where are you?
Where did the logo go?
Maybe it's getting confused because I didn't have a colon here.
There we go.
Look at that.
That's pretty good.
And I don't know if I want this margin right as big as that.
If I make this 10, will it move it closer a bit?
I think it did.
Maybe it would have.
I think that's the, I know I'm pointing at the screen, but you obviously can't see that.
I think that's this distance right here.
All right.
That looks pretty good.
Is it centered?
Okay.
So I've underlined all of this, so I want the, I might like copy all of this and I might
say, I've modified the style to this, but I still need the header container to be centered
on the screen.
Please add this.
Okay.
I think this justify content center should have our fix.
Yeah, let's go.
All right.
We're almost there with the title.
I really don't like this blue color.
So going into our final app, I do like this blue that we ended up using in the final app.
So I think if I inspect this, can I easily see the color here?
Not sure if I can.
What I typically do when I'm trying to figure out specific colors on the screen is I'll
usually download like a Chrome extension.
I think any browser that you use will probably have some sort of suitable extension.
This is called ColorZilla, I think.
Click on this.
Now I have a color and I can just immediately take this.
And instead of saying that the background color is blue, I'll paste in this color and
we get that nice color.
It's not filling the full screen though.
So maybe what would be smarter than specifically filling this for the H2 tag is I could just
go ahead and have this fill for the entire body element of our HTML.
And look at that.
We got a much nicer looking title in my opinion.
We could play around with that a bit more, play around with like the margins and the
padding.
I am pretty happy with this.
Yeah, I'm pretty happy with this.
I might just remove this border radius.
Oh, that's just making, that won't actually affect anything here now that we have the
background color the same.
I just don't love this padding.
I'm going to make this a bit small there.
Can't tell if that's doing much.
Yeah, I mean, like this is exactly what I'm saying.
You can play around with this a bit more to get it exactly how you want, but I'm content
with that.
And that's some basics of HTML CSS styling.
All right, next, let's start customizing our different charts here.
And really we play around with the colors.
We play around with, this doesn't have any grid lines, whereas before, whereas before
this had some grid lines.
Also the axis has changed, like these labels is a bit different, whereas these are nicely
capitalized.
So I think again, starting top to bottom, let's play around with some of these things.
All right, so going into our Altair graph, I think the first thing we want to do is remove
chart lines.
We want to change up the titles, et cetera.
Again, work smarter, not harder.
You could look at the documentation, but I might just honestly copy like my code.
Okay, next, I want to modify an Altair graph.
I want to remove grid lines, change my X axis and Y axis labels to be capitalized, maybe
it'd be more clear, but to from month and quantity ordered to month and quantity ordered
respectively.
What else do we want to do?
I want to make the font color blue and let's specify a font we can use for all of our charts
and of type Arial.
And is there any other big changes we wanted to make?
I think that's the main things that I see.
Yeah, it's the main things that I see.
I guess we maybe remove tick marks, remove tick marks, leave the numbers, just the actual
mark.
Here is the sample code I have.
This is kind of how I craft a lot of these prompts.
Copy this and let's see what happens, enter.
This looks pretty good, so we can use this to Alt X and Alt Y to do the changes that
we want.
One thing I don't love, I'd rather just have this be like a generic one size fits all thing,
so I might say, I might just honestly pull that out myself as a variable.
So let's go ahead, copy this, go in here, paste in the updated code, make sure it's
at the right level of depth, I think it was right here, okay, run this.
We see that it did work.
I don't love, why did the labels, the fonts not change colors?
All right, adjusting the colors, oh, title color, let's see.
Okay, and I really don't like that this is all just defined here, so I'm going to pull
this out as a variable, call this Font Props, and I'll call this Font Props, so I don't
have to change it in two places when I modify this.
Run this again, and cool, that looks much better.
I could do the same thing with the title, I'm sure.
So where's the title defined?
Title is here.
See if this works.
I don't know if it will.
Nope.
I think I could define this as, though, alt.title, and then pass in the access.
Did that work?
Come on.
Title param says no.
See, I can't figure things out, but I can keep asking ChatGBT to help me.
And one thing I don't love, I don't love this blue color, I would rather a darker color,
so again, I might, like, look at this, I might do the color Zilla, I might pick, like,
this color, got it copied, and then I can paste in this color into here, into here.
Now we have a better colored, you could play around with that more, maybe make it darker,
but I like this color better than previously.
Now the only question is how do we change that title color?
How can I change my title, sales over time, dash, dash, to use the same color as my axis
labels?
Good old ChatGBT.
Yeah, configure title, looks like you'd do it here.
Add that to our code, and it's just, yeah, a little bit of make some changes and test
it and then figure out what you need to change and make some more changes.
I will copy the same color.
You could even make this color a variable if you wanted to so you're not passing around
this random hex code, but we'll see that this will hopefully do what we want.
Look at that.
Looks good.
Cool.
And how does that compare to our final?
I think the only change I see is that these labels are horizontal instead of vertical.
Again, I can just say make x-axis labels are like tick marks, horizontal instead of vertical
item labels.
Looks like I can do a label angle in this one.
Now, I think that if we made them both zero, it's totally fine because this one is already
zero.
You can decide whether this makes sense or not.
It looks terrible if it's smooshed like this, but it looks good when it's spread out.
So yeah, you be the judge if this makes sense.
Double check that everything works.
Cool.
Looks like the Altair's good, so let's keep moving on.
Let's make some modifications now to these lower charts.
And so how do these compare?
If we look at our final one, this is a nice blue color spectrum.
It also has no grid lines.
It has no background color.
Let's use this as reference because this is our actual code.
So remove the grid lines, remove this background color, change up this to use a color spectrum,
change up these labels to be proper.
If I could just remove the product label, we want to do this for all of them.
So again, I think that honestly the easiest thing to do here is to start with ChatGPT
and just have that help you kind of accomplish some of your goals and then make tweaks as
needed.
Now I'm modifying a Plotly graph.
I want to change my X axis label or from product to displaying nothing.
I want my Y axis label to go from quantity ordered to quantity ordered.
I want to remove the background color.
I want to remove grid lines.
I want to, what else do I want to do?
I want to make, change the bar colors from a solid single color to a color spectrum of
blues.
Please implement these changes.
I think that was all that we wanted to do.
Okay, that looks good.
Let's copy this, paste it in, one, two, three, there we go.
Let's see what happens.
That looks pretty good.
I really don't like this legend that popped up.
Can we still modify things?
Yes.
It's not showing me all my labels, that's weird.
So the big changes was this color continuous scale was added and it uses the quantity ordered
color to help with that.
But I don't like this legend.
And I also want to be able to like replicate this stuff to move some of this stuff into
like a function that I can use in these other tabs so I don't have a bunch of copied code.
So I want to make a couple additional changes.
There's an annoying legend showing up in the Plotly code.
Please remove that from the graph.
Also standardize the code into a function because I need to apply the same styles to
other Plotly charts.
Gray, I like this.
Def style Plotly chart, we'll paste that up towards the top of our code and then we can
copy this and put it now into our...
Let's see how this works.
No, the chart's still there.
Okay.
So if Chat GP doesn't work, I say go to handy dandy Google, remove legend from bar chart
color spectrum Plotly express.
Okay we have a couple different options.
You can update the traces, update layout show legend.
For the color bar, here we go.
You can only use fig update layout color access show scale.
So fig update and then layout underscores the same as fig.update layout and then the
stuff after that color access show scale.
So we can go ahead and do add to our chart over here.
Where's that function?
We can add color access show scale equals false and I think that should remove it.
Cool.
Look at that.
That looks much better.
We can add that and now we can apply this to the other ones to get those to copy the
style.
If we look at our final code or final dashboard, we see that we do use reds for lowest sellers
and lowest sellers value.
So I do want to make sure we apply that, but I think that should be a pretty simple change.
And then the only other thing I might recommend here is this is kind of annoying here.
This bar, I just feel like maybe you would want to hide this.
Like if you're sharing this dashboard, like they don't need to know the plotly controls
that you can do here.
So if we inspect this, we see we get this mode bar here, class mode bar.
We can just, you know, as before you saw before, we can go ahead and add something
like class mode bar display none and just hide this completely.
So now if you hover, it doesn't show up.
So maybe that's something you want to do, but it's just cool to see how you can apply
this HTML CSS changes to like help just clean up some things.
But what did we want to do?
Well, I forget what I said.
Oh, we wanted to just apply these styles to the other ones.
Okay.
I'm going to copy just basically this snippet of code and apply to the others.
So this one uses value now instead of, I should modify the second one.
Looks good.
And then I guess the Y-axis label, shoot, now there's a different Y-axis label for quantity
ordered.
I'm going to pass this in as a, another field.
Okay.
Now we've modified it to have different titles based on different things.
That looks good.
We can now copy this into the last two.
So this one pasted in here, then instead of this blues, I think if we just did reds, it
will be totally fine.
I think that's also a default option.
Looks good.
And then finally, copy this, paste it in here, do the reds again here.
I think the final change is maybe we would want to standardize this font to be like the
same blue.
So I might just go back to the chat GPT window and I modify the font to be Arial size 12
with a blue color that has color, what was that hexadecimal code that we had before?
It was this, and I might just make a variable at the top of our screen called like font
color, just so we can standardize and just use this variable if we ever want to change
fonts.
Okay.
Cool.
We can add this to our style Plotly chart code.
Look at that.
Now we got a nice change in color.
Looks good.
And if I wanted to just clean this up a bit, I could pass in font color to all the places
that use it.
You could also do the same with font type and make that Arial, set to Arial.
All right.
That is the second chart.
Now let's move to the heat map.
What is the differences between the heat maps?
With our final one, we have it all blues.
So same type of process I would repeat, I would do something like, okay, where's our
heat map?
Okay.
We've got our heat map here, and I did actually just notice an issue.
This is not hour of day.
This is our day, and this is order count down here.
So I just need to switch the labels.
And I think in our final, we didn't actually include the title because we already have
kind of the title up here.
So I'm going to remove the title.
Cool.
So we have this pasted into chat GVT.
I have the following code.
I want to have the font changed to use the color font color and use font type Arial.
And I want the color spectrum to be all blues, different shades of blues.
Please make changes.
So this is kind of a standard like chat GVT workflow and how I kind of access things these
days.
So it looks like we can pass all of this into our...I guess it makes sense to make a variable
for this too.
And I feel like there's kind of a...one downside of making these stylistic changes sometimes
is it's hard to keep them neat as you start adding more and more things.
So I'm kind of going through this quickly, but I would kind of recommend after you complete
this type of stuff to kind of look through, see if there's ways you can move different
aspects into different files or just clean up different details of this.
Okay.
So now we have this in the blue font as well.
It looks good, but it didn't use the blues.
How can we get the blues?
Looks like we can do SNS.lightpalette this.
Let's see what happens when we do this.
Looks like it works.
It's not the same exact blues as I showed before.
I'm curious.
This is the type of difference that I'm going to just double-check what I had before.
Looks like I just used what was called blues before.
So I'm going to just copy this as blues, see what it does there.
That looks better.
I like that.
Look at that.
Then we also want to change these to be shades of blue.
So again, just keep repeating the same type of process.
I have this folium heatmap.
I want to make the colors of the heatmap only shades of blues.
Make modifications to the code to use this color spectrum.
Okay.
That looks straightforward enough.
See what happens here.
I don't love the blues here.
I think it's hard to see the differences.
I'd rather use like the same spectrum that we used here.
So I might honestly like open this up.
I might highlight these different colors, like what is the max color here, like this.
I might change the max color to this nice one.
I might change the min color to the lightest thing here, maybe like this.
And I might now go back to chat GPT and say, I've modified the 0.2 and 1.0 of the spectrum.
Please fill in the other values to be between these.
I wonder if this will work.
Very curious.
Let's see.
I feel like this is hard to...maybe, I don't know.
You can play around with this a bit.
Maybe it looks a little bit better.
I want to just copy in whatever I had previously in my final draft.
It looks like I had a 0.02, maybe that helps, I don't know.
Yeah, I like the kind of lighter colors a bit more.
But yeah, whatever your preference is, it doesn't matter too much.
That's the heat map.
I think we have about everything.
I think the only thing that we might want to change now is this bar color is slightly
different.
I will use this bar color.
Okay.
Going back to Alt-tie your graph, make the bars of the bar chart use this color.
There's a marked bar here.
Let's copy this.
Oh, it's already there.
Just need to add the color.
All right.
What happens there?
Cool.
And now we've got this nice color here.
I'm pretty happy with this.
I think we mostly covered the different changes that we saw in our final app.
That looks good.
One change I might make is first I'll commit this, get app.py, get commit, made final changes
to style.
And then I might also run black app.py to reformat it, reformatted with black.
Cool.
Well, this was some styling.
This was ultimately, we built a pretty cool app.
And I think that we walked through a ton of skills that you can really take and adapt
to whatever you think makes sense on your own.
Really run with these skills, you know, take templates from Shiny.
But I found that these Shiny dashboards are super powerful.
You can build all sorts of really cool stuff and deploy them super easily.
So I've been very excited playing around with Shiny and making dashboards like this.
Hopefully you found that this series was helpful.
If you did enjoy this video or any videos in the series, I mean a lot of you, throw
this one a thumbs up, subscribe to the channel if you haven't already.
Would also be very curious what types of dashboards you would love to see in the future.
So leave comments with suggestions down below.
But until next time, everyone, this was fun.
Peace.